---
title: Rebuilding the Web We Lost
slug: rebuilding_the_web_we_lost
date_published: 2012-12-18T21:38:04.000Z
date_updated: 2012-12-18T21:38:04.000Z
tags: [tech, web]
---

We have the obligation to never speak of our concerns without suggesting our solutions. I’ve been truly gratified to watch the response to [The Web We Lost](/2012/12/13/the_web_we_lost/) over the last few days; It’s become one of the most popular things I’ve ever written and has inspired great responses.

But the most important question we can ask is: How do we rebuild the positive aspects of the web we lost? There are a few starting points, building on conversations we’ve been having for years. Let’s look at the responsibilities we must accept if we’re going to return the web to the values that a generation of creators cared about.

- **Take responsibility and accept blame.** The biggest reason the social web drifted from many of the core values of that early era was the insularity and arrogance of many of us who created the tools of the time. I was certainly guilty of this, and many of my peers were as well. We took it as a self-evident and obvious goal that people would even *want* to participate in this medium, instead of doing the hard work necessary to make it a welcoming and rewarding place for the rest of the world. We favored obscure internecine battles about technical minutia over the hard, humbling work of engaging a billion people in connecting online, and setting the stage for the billions to come. To surpass the current generation of dominant social networks and apps, which have unsurprisingly become arrogant and inflexible during their own era of success, we’ll have to return to being as hungry and as humble as we were when the web was young. Because last time, we were both naive and self-absorbed enough that we deserved to fail.
- **Don’t just meet the UX standards, raise the bar.** Obviously, the single biggest reason that the new era of social apps and sites have succeeded where the early efforts did not is because of their massively superior user experience, from the front-end user interfaces to the back-end performance. The expected thing to do would be to hope that a new generation of user-respecting apps came along and matched the best that Facebook and Twitter and Pinterest to have to offer. But actually, due to the profound entrenchment that these platforms already have across culture, the new apps have to be an order of magnitude *better* in user experience. The good news is, as the rest of the web [transitions from making pages to making streams](/2012/08/14/stop_publishing_web_pages/), they’ll all be revisiting the tools and technologies they use to connect, and that’ll form a big opportunity for new players to participate.
- **Rethink funding fundamentals.** As we’ve seen over and over, the giant social networks seem to inevitably piss off their user bases by changing product features and terms of service in ways that catalyze huge waves of user-generated discontent. But the fundamental reason these sites refused to accommodate so many user demands is because of economics. Those sites make their revenues on models dictated by the terms of funding from the firms that backed them. But as we’ve discussed before, it’s possible to [fund contemporary startups](http://dashes.com/anil/2011/04/funding-a-startup-without-vc.html) either without venture capital, or with a level of efficiency that allows [mom and pop startups to reach web scale](http://dashes.com/anil/2011/01/mom-and-pop-at-web-scale.html). To be clear, venture funding powered much of the first wave of social startups and were a big reason they were able to achieve many of their successes, so VC will be part of the ecosystem in the next wave as well. But the terms and dynamics can be profoundly different, supporting startups that are [intentionally less efficient](http://dashes.com/anil/2012/09/to-less-efficient-startups.html), perhaps even making use of the skills of [blue collar coders](http://dashes.com/anil/2012/10/the-blue-collar-coder.html) to provide a lot of people will good, solid middle-class jobs instead of optimizing, as current companies do, for making a small number of people enormously wealthy.
- **Explore architectural changes.** One of the fundamental reasons that the economics of doing a startup at web scale are different is because of the proliferation of cloud computing and very, very high-performance, reliable open-source components that provide advanced functionality which was prohibitively expensive a decade ago. Instead of backing up a truckload of Dell servers to a data center and then installing a few hundred thousand dollars worth of Oracle software, we can pick and choose a few components off the shelf to get started. More importantly, [consumers will start to be able to use the cloud themselves](http://dashes.com/anil/2012/06/clouds-for-people-or-the-consumerization-of-the-cloud.html), which removes the current constraint around having to build single, centralized services to provide a great consumer experience. Today, big social apps have to spend millions of dollars handling DMCA takedown requests and FBI investigations into illegal content and in general fighting the web’s fundamental desire to be centralized. New apps don’t need to obey those constraints.
- **Outflank by pursuing talent outside the obvious.** The current wave of the social web doesn’t just demonstrate its arrogance through its product decisions. The people involved in creating these platforms are hired from a narrow band of privileged graduates from a small number of top-tier schools, overwhelmingly male and focused narrowly on the traditional Silicon Valley geography. By constrast, the next wave of apps can harken back to many of the best of the early social startups, which often featured mixed-gender founding teams, attracted talent from geographically diverse regions (Flickr was born in *Canada*!) and were often created by people with liberal arts degrees or even no degree at all. Aside from being the responsible thing to do, having a diverse team generates a variety of unexpected product features and innovations that don’t come from the groupthink of homogenous cultures.
- **Exploit their weakness: Insularity.** Another way of looking at the exclusionary tendencies of typical Silicon Valley startups is by considering the extraordinary privilege of most tech tycoons as a weakness to be exploited. Whether it’s [Mark Zuckerberg’s unique level of privilege](http://dashes.com/anil/2010/09/the-facebook-reckoning-1.html) limiting his ability to understand why a single, universal public identity might ruin people’s lives, or the [tendency to launch apps first to a small, clubby circle of insiders](http://dashes.com/anil/2012/08/you-cant-start-the-revolution-from-the-country-club.html), new startups don’t have to repeat these mistakes. And by broadening their appeal from the start, new apps and networks can outflank the big players, paying attention to audiences that hadn’t been properly respected last time. That insularity even extends to the tech industry typically ignoring the world of policy and regulations and government until it’s too late. While the [big tech players have formed their own RIAA](http://dashes.com/anil/2012/09/tech-now-has-its-own-riaa.html), the best case is that they’ll focus on overall issues like spectrum policy and net neutrality, ignoring the coming reality of policy changes that will try to protect regular users.
- **Dont’ trust the trade press.** Another essential step for breaking out of the current tech industry’s predictable patterns will be for entrepreneurs and creators to educate themselves about the true history of the tech industry and its products. Our business tends to follow a few simple, repeating cycles, like moving from centralization to decentralization and back, or from interoperable communications to silos and back. But as we’ve discussed, [you can’t trust the tech press to teach you about the tech industry](http://dashes.com/anil/2012/04/why-you-cant-trust-tech-press-to-teach-you-about-the-tech-industry.html), so you’ll have to know your shit. Fortunately, a lot of us old-timers are still around, and still answer our emails sometimes, so it’s possible to just ask. Imagine if Instagram had simply asked the folks who used to work at Flickr, “Did you ever change your terms of service? What freaked people out?” And even better, we can blog our own progress, because [if you didn’t blog it, it didn’t happen](http://dashes.com/anil/2011/01/if-you-didnt-blog-it-it-didnt-happen.html). In that way, we form our own community of practice, our own new peer review process for what we learn about making the web work the right way.
- **Create public spaces.** Right now, all of the places we can assemble on the web in any kind of numbers are privately owned. And [privately-owned public spaces aren’t real public spaces](http://dashes.com/anil/2012/03/captive-atria-and-living-in-public.html). They don’t allow for the play and the chaos and the creativity and brilliance that only arise in spaces that don’t exist purely to generate profit. And they’re susceptible to [being gradually gaslighted](http://dashes.com/anil/2011/11/facebook-is-gaslighting-the-web.html) by the companies that own them.

Overall, there are *lots* of ways that the current generation of social sites are vulnerable. There are users that the current tech industry considers undesirable, and technology choices that are considered taboo, and traditions around hiring and product strategy that force them to concede huge opportunities right out of the gate.

As is obvious from the responses I’ve gotten, many, many people care about a social web that honors certain human and creative values. As I’ve spent years thinking about the right way to write for this blog, and to build [ThinkUp](http://thinkup.com/), and to sit on the board at [Stack Exchange](http://stackexchange.com/), and to advise clients at [Activate](http://activate.com/), and to work on [all the other stuff](__GHOST_URL__/) I do, I just keep running into the fact that there’s a huge opportunity to make a great new generation of human-friendly apps with positive social values.

These new companies will be recognizable in that they’ll impact culture and media and government and society, and that they’ll invent great new technologies. They’ll still make a bunch of money for the people who found them. But they’ll look different, both in terms of the people who make them, and the people they serve. And they’ll be more durable, not optimized based on current fashions in financing, but because they’re built on the accurate belief that there are people who care deeply about the web they use, the works they create, the connections they make, and the humans on the other side of those connections.
