---
title: Did they actually say 'Love 2.0'?
slug: did
date_published: 2007-02-27T19:45:48.000Z
date_updated: 2007-02-27T19:45:48.000Z
tags: weblogs
---

I was very flattered last week that GeekSugar post [an interview with me and my wife Alaina](http://geeksugar.com/141727) that they did a few weeks ago. It’s strange enough to be asked to do interviews, and while we’ve both done a bit of public speaking and press, I don’t think we’ve ever done anything like this *together* before. But we were asked to do it for Valentine’s Day, so what the heck.

The funny thing was the interview’s focus on gadgetry and geekiness led to some assumptions about how our household actually works. I’m pretty sure we’ve never had any debates about whether we want a particular gadget or not.

> **Geeksugar:** Who makes the final decision when it comes to gadgets for the home?
> **Anil:** Actually, we almost never even have discussions about this. We’re fairly moderate in our gadget purchases, so we can each pretty much get whatever we want. It’s always a nice surprise to come home and find that the other person has something shiny to show off.
> **Alaina:** We’re pretty in sync when it comes to gadgets and our finances and trust each other to make these kinds of decisions. If it’s a big ticket item, like the flat panel tv we just bought, we’ll discuss it together first so there are no surprises when it comes time to balance the checkbook.

I think it’s reassuring that we answered our questions separately, but came up with pretty much the same answers. And it’s telling that my answers are generally 10 times longer than Alaina’s, just like in real life. As I tried to say in the interview, it’s like being married to Michigan J. Frog.
