---
title: true evil
slug: true_evil
date_published: 2002-07-12T07:06:29.000Z
date_updated: 2002-07-12T07:06:29.000Z
---

One of the interesting things that’s emerged from the last year is the propensity for people to use the word, and the *concept* of "evil" again. I had a favorite *Time* cover a few years back that was a great black-on-black full-page that subtly spelled out EVIL. (If I recall, the cover story was an essay by Pico Iyer… anybody remember?) Perfect for the wall of a teenager’s bedroom, especially since I was lucky enough to appreciate the inanity of a *news*magazine leading with a cover on EVIL. That’s all news *is*, reporting on evil.

But I had a harder time understanding the true nature of evil, because it’s just a ridiculous construct. My conception of it, dork that I am, was basically Darth Vader. (Does it reveal what a romantic I am that my definition of evil has good at its core?) And I couldn’t understand how regular folks could interact with evil. I pictured a bunch of tired TIE fighter pilots, schlepping back to their quarters in the Death Star after another mindless training run, and running into the Sith Lord in those cramped-ass industrial grey Late Imperial hallways…

**TIE Pilot:** Hey, uh…. Darth?

**Darth Vader:***glowers menacingly*

**TIE Pilot:** We, um… Me and a couple of the other guys were gonna rent *Cocoon 2* later and watch it in the pilot’s lounge. Did you want —

**Darth Vader:** No.

**TIE Pilot:** But we were gonna have, like, popcorn. And maybe then some foosball?

**Darth Vader:***raises gripping hand in the "you want some choke-choke?" gesture and cocks one lava-scarred eyebrow underneath his helmet*

**TIE Pilot:** Yeah, okay then. We’ll just be down in the lounge. If you change your mind, we might get *Princess Bride* again, then, too. *walks away*

**Darth Vader:***long, mechanically-controlled sigh*
